[Amit Varma]: It's the morning of November 8, 2016. You are the Prime Minister of India for the rest
[Amit Varma]: of that day. And in that day, you have to enact exactly one policy, which without breaking
[Amit Varma]: the law, or going against the constitution of India, hurts the people of India the most.
[Amit Varma]: The maximum damage to the maximum people, whose effects will linger for the longest
[Amit Varma]: possible time. What will you do? This is a thought experiment I've been posing to my
[Amit Varma]: friends for the past couple of months, and none of them, not one of them, has come up
[Amit Varma]: with a policy worse than what our Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, actually announced on the evening
[Unknown]: of November 8. Demonetization. Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast
[Unknown]: on economics, politics and behavioural science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badumal.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, my weekly podcast on the seen and unseen effects of
[Amit Varma]: public policy and private action. On November 8, 2016, India's Prime Minister, Narendra
[Amit Varma]: Modi, announced that 500 and 1000 rupee notes would cease to be legal tender from Bindai
[Amit Varma]: that day. These notes constituted 86% of the cash in circulation, and essentially reached
[Amit Varma]: into every single pocket in the country. My first reaction when I heard of the move was
[Amit Varma]: that it was bound to be a disaster. I remembered Frederick Hayek's warning about the limits
[Amit Varma]: of knowledge. A move like this disrupted too much of the economy, reached into too many
[Amit Varma]: lives and the unknown unknowns, as it were, the unintended consequences, were terrifying.
[Amit Varma]: It's been just two and a half months since demonetization, or notebandi as it's also
[Amit Varma]: called, and we are still coming to terms with the initially unseen effects. None of the
[Amit Varma]: news is good. But the interesting thing is that even at the level of initially seen effects,
[Amit Varma]: there is no good news. The government laid out a bunch of desirable objectives, but did
[Amit Varma]: those really materialize? To discuss the seen and the unseen effects of demonetization,
[Amit Varma]: I have with me today, Suyash Rai, an economic analyst based in Delhi. Suyash, welcome to
[Amit Varma]: the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Suyash, before I talk about the unintended consequences of demonetization, I want to
[Amit Varma]: talk a bit about the intended effects. A primary intention behind demonetization was to hit
[Amit Varma]: black money. How far do you think the government succeeded in this?
[Guest]: So let's first understand what the decision was and what are the pathways through which
[Guest]: it could impact black money and those holding black money. The decision was precisely to
[Guest]: discontinue the legal tender status of 500 and 1000 rupees notes from 8th November midnight.
[Guest]: And these notes basically were 86% of the currency in circulation. And lots of people
[Guest]: held these notes. And some of these notes must have been held by those who had made
[Guest]: black money over a period of time. Now, people make black money and then they accumulate
[Guest]: it over a period of time, right? That's unaccounted wealth is the right term to use for that wealth
[Guest]: that they hold. And that wealth is held in many forms. Some of it is probably held in
[Guest]: cash form. Some of it is held in the form of property, binami, in gold, in the form
[Guest]: of shares, in the form of wealth stored in foreign accounts. So there are many ways in
[Guest]: which it may be held. And this one pathway of impact on black money from demonetization
[Guest]: is an attack on the cash form of unaccounted wealth. How much is that? So, I mean, we don't
[Guest]: have really good estimates of how much is that because we're not observing all the behaviour
[Guest]: across the country about how unaccounted wealth is stored. But one source of data that we
[Guest]: have is from the rates that are conducted by the tax authorities all over the country.
[Guest]: So if you look at the data that was provided by the Ministry of Finance in its 2012 white
[Guest]: paper on black money, it provides data from over 23,000 tax rates conducted over several
[Guest]: years from 2006 onwards. And what it shows is that from the total undisturbed income
[Guest]: that is found after these rates are conducted and investigations are conducted and you figure
[Guest]: out how much was the undisturbed income that a person was having, less than 5% on an average
[Guest]: is the cash that is caught in these investigations and rates. So it is not a totally precise
[Guest]: estimate of the unaccounted wealth in cash form, but it's a reasonably good beginning
[Guest]: point. Now, based on some other considerations that you may have, you can adjust it. But
[Guest]: if it's less than 5% from this data, I would be very, very, I mean, I would not be keen
[Guest]: to accept any estimate more than 6, 7% of unaccounted wealth being in cash form. So
[Guest]: that's what we're talking about here. That's the first pathway. And even if a person loses
[Guest]: all of that 5, 6%, the welfare loss for him or her is not very big because what can you
[Guest]: buy with 100 crore that you can't buy with 93 crore or 94 crore, right? So it's an inconvenience.
[Guest]: It's a tough time for a few days, maybe weeks, but it's not going to disrupt your life entirely.
[Guest]: There is another pathway, which we'll know over a period of time how it played out. This
[Guest]: is a pathway of enforcement opportunities. So what has happened is that lots of people
[Guest]: must be trying to launder money, trying to hide money, trying to get money exchanged.
[Guest]: So in that process, some of them will make mistakes and will get caught. We're hearing
[Guest]: lots of news reports of tax authorities conducting raids on people with new money or old money
[Guest]: trying to get it laundered. So, but it is not adding up to a large number, right? I
[Guest]: read a report, the Centre for Monitoring of Indian Economy had done a summary of all these
[Guest]: raids that have been conducted. And so far, after two months, this is as of 6th of January
[Guest]: 2017, the total undisclosed income from all these raids added up to just over 5,000 crore
[Guest]: rupees. And just imagine you've cancelled 15.4 lakh crore rupees of notes in circulation.
[Guest]: And this pathway gives you, has still not given away 5,000 crore rupees, if this estimate
[Guest]: is to be believed. The other pathway, which I just talked about, where a loss has been
[Guest]: inflicted upon the person who is holding unaccounted wealth in cash form. We don't even know how
[Guest]: much is that because we have not yet been told. We are recording this on the 12th of
[Guest]: January 2017. And we don't even know how much money does not come back into the system.
[Guest]: So that's one estimate about how much may have been destroyed in the hands of people
[Guest]: holding unaccounted wealth. And even the money that doesn't come back, part of it may be
[Guest]: by genuine people who had to take a loss. Like I read an op-ed by someone who had 50,000
[Guest]: rupees in crisp old, but crisp notes of 500 rupees each. And that person simply had lost
[Guest]: trace of it and found it after the deadline had expired.
[Guest]: So we are in a situation where we can't truly tell. But even if you assume that all of the
[Guest]: money that doesn't come back, all the old money that doesn't come back, is basically
[Guest]: black money that has been disrupted and destroyed. It is not likely to be a big dent on those
[Guest]: holding black money because we have some idea that their total unaccounted wealth, only
[Guest]: a small portion of it is in cash flow.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially to sum it up, one, this move attacked the stock and not the flow of black
[Amit Varma]: money. Two, even as far as the stock of black money was concerned, the estimates by the
[Amit Varma]: finance ministry themselves based on these IT rates showed that around 5% of black money
[Amit Varma]: is actually kept in the form of cash. And even that from the anecdotal evidence I hear
[Amit Varma]: all around me has been laundered very, very easily. So black money holders have at best
[Amit Varma]: suffered the kind of minor inconvenience that the Modi government promised they would, but
[Amit Varma]: the people would, but the poor have suffered far, far more.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on to sort of the next rationale given for demonetization, which was that this will
[Amit Varma]: attack fake currency. There's a lot of counterfeit currency out there. There were whispers about
[Amit Varma]: how Pakistan is, you know, introducing fake currency into the market, is used for terrorism
[Amit Varma]: and so on. How much credence does this explanation hold?
[Guest]: So let me be very clear. This decision will wipe out all the fake currency in the economy.
[Guest]: Most of it, almost. Why? Because we know that most of the fake currency is in 500 and thousand
[Guest]: rupee notes. So it's an achievement and that's a good thing to have happened. However, let
[Guest]: me just, I mean, discuss the scale of this problem. So, you know, the problem is being
[Guest]: solved through this decision, but the scale also matters about how big a problem it was
[Guest]: and should such a disruptive decision have been taken to solve that problem.
[Guest]: So National Investigation Agency, along with the Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta,
[Guest]: had in early 2016 done an estimate of total black money, total fake currency in circulation
[Guest]: in India, and that estimate pegged it at around 400 crore rupees. So out of about 18 lakh
[Guest]: crore rupees of currency in circulation, only about 400 crore rupees was in fake Indian
[Guest]: currency note, FICN. So one out of 4,000 notes was estimated to be the fake currency. And
[Guest]: this estimate is not done by some, I mean, you know, independent researcher sitting in
[Guest]: his office, but by the foremost statistical institute in this country and the foremost
[Guest]: investigation agency in the country. So that was the scale and this would have disrupted
[Guest]: it, but it is not a permanent solution to the problem of fake currency because it's
[Guest]: only a question of those, for those who are trying to circulate fake currency in the Indian
[Guest]: economy, they have to just adapt, they have to change their machines and bring out new
[Guest]: fake currencies. There have already been reports of people trying to fake the new 2,000 rupee
[Guest]: notes through very kind of crude methods as of now, but even though more sophisticated
[Guest]: methods will be used and they'll be, they'll come back. But at least from what I have read
[Guest]: about it, this is not usually the method that countries employ for addressing fake currency.
[Guest]: Usually what is done is that slowly you phase out the old notes so that the fake currency
[Guest]: that was in those designs are removed. We did two years ago, we basically eliminated
[Guest]: the 2,500 rupee note that was issued before 2005 and that helped address the problem.
[Guest]: Secondly, you try to intercept when they are trying to infuse this currency into the economy.
[Guest]: So for example, we in India are able to intercept about a third of the fake currency that they
[Guest]: try to infuse. So that takes care of a part of the problem. So it's, first of all, the
[Guest]: scale is not as big. If you look at the scale of this problem for USD and all, it's much
[Guest]: bigger. And secondly, there are other better methods, gradual, but better methods to address
[Guest]: this problem, I think.
[Amit Varma]: The third rationale which is often given is connected to the fake currency to some extent
[Amit Varma]: is that terrorism and criminality thrive on, are a cash economy, they thrive on cash and
[Amit Varma]: that they would be affected by this. What's your take on this?
[Guest]: I think that's a reasonable expectation. To a large extent, these activities are cash
[Guest]: based. For example, there have been reports that child trafficking has slowed down or
[Guest]: totally disrupted because it was a largely a cash based network. But we have to think
[Guest]: about whether this is a permanent impact on these activities or even a medium term to
[Guest]: long term impact, or is it something which is just in the transition? Because the entire
[Guest]: economy is disrupted because if you cancel out 86% of the currency in circulation, so
[Guest]: all activities, a subset of those activities are criminal and terror activities. And we
[Guest]: have to see whether some of these networks are permanently disrupted, that we will know
[Guest]: over a period of time. For example, some of the networks could not withstand the pressure
[Guest]: of not having any activity for two, three months or four months, if they are permanently
[Guest]: disrupted. That's a benefit for society in the long run. But other than that, only short
[Guest]: term, because you're already seeing reports of terrorist activities being conducted, and
[Guest]: you've catched or killed terrorists who have the new notes on their bodies, you find new
[Guest]: notes, there was some encounter in Kashmir. And there is no evidence, at least from say,
[Guest]: look at Kashmir, the number of terror attacks has not really decreased in these, so there
[Guest]: is no, I mean, anyway, there are so many other factors that come into play, that it's very
[Guest]: hard to assign causality or any kind of, you don't know the counterfactual. Maybe it would
[Guest]: have been higher, the terror attacks frequency would have been higher if demonetization was
[Guest]: not done. But I don't think there is any evidence to suggest or even a prior kind of reasoning
[Guest]: to suggest that there's going to be a permanent impact on these activities. But there will
[Guest]: be a short term impact, because as you rightly said, there's a considerable amount of cash
[Guest]: intensity to these activities, and that will be disrupted. But, I mean, demonetizing 86%
[Guest]: of currency is not the...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, this argument always seemed a little specious to me, because I would think
[Guest]: that, look, if you disrupt all businesses, you will, of course, disrupt these kinds of
[Guest]: businesses as well.
[Guest]: Yeah, like, if you disrupt your all mobile network in the country, okay, then all terrorists
[Guest]: will not only talk to each other, but you and I will also not talk to each other.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. So I want to move on from this a bit. I mean, the remarkable thing about this
[Amit Varma]: demonetization and why it's unfair to compare it to, say, you know, earlier demonetizations
[Amit Varma]: is the last time when this happened in the late 70s. The notes in question were really
[Amit Varma]: high denomination and they constituted only 0.6% of the total cash supply. These are 86%
[Amit Varma]: of the total cash supply. A 500 rupee note today will buy you less than a 50 rupee note
[Amit Varma]: would have, you know, bought you in 1978. So the common man uses these notes. These
[Amit Varma]: aren't just used for, you know, storing illicit money, but actually for everyday transactions.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about the enormous impact this must have had on the economy.
[Guest]: So let me begin by just drawing a thread from what you said, that these are not really high
[Guest]: denomination notes, you know, these are higher denomination notes than other notes that circulate
[Guest]: in the Indian economy. So if you look at other countries, there is a 500 euro note, there
[Guest]: is a 1000 Swiss franc note, there's a 10,000 yen note. These are high denomination notes.
[Guest]: So in fact, EU has studied the use of 500 euro note and they also are trying to phase
[Guest]: out gradually, not in this overnight fashion, the 500 euro note because the studies show
[Guest]: that it's being disproportionately used for storing black money or for criminal activities
[Guest]: and all because it's not a practical medium of exchange note, right? So these notes have
[Guest]: two core key functions. One is the store of value, store of white money value and black
[Guest]: money value, right? And the other function, which is a very important function, probably
[Guest]: the most important function is the medium of exchange function. It is used to buy things
[Guest]: to transact in the economy, right? So these two are the uses. What you are trying to address
[Guest]: is the store of value function for black money. That's the limited thing you want to address.
[Guest]: But in the process of disrupting the store of value in white money, as well as the whole
[Guest]: medium of exchange function in the economy. And as I said, the 500 and 1,000 rupee notes
[Guest]: are not very, very big notes. Everybody is using them. These are practical medium of
[Guest]: exchange notes. For example, if you want to go and buy grocery, you can easily get a 1,000
[Guest]: rupee change because it's not a very expensive note. In purchasing power parity terms, it's
[Guest]: just $30 basically. So now in the Indian economy, especially this is important to understand
[Guest]: because the Indian economy is still very cash intensive in terms of the volume of transaction.
[Guest]: In the value of transaction terms, there's a lot of large value business to business
[Guest]: transactions have moved online because it's not practical to give 100 rupees in a cash
[Guest]: form to a company from which you're buying lots of auto parts, right? That's not how
[Guest]: it works. But in retail, if you look at individual and retail behavior, so let's look at two
[Guest]: things. One is how many people have used non-cash instruments. So in 2013, there was a survey
[Guest]: done which showed that more than 90% people had never used anything other than cash. Never.
[Guest]: So that's one fact for you. Second is that there are about 1.5 crore shops in this country,
[Guest]: retail shops. Out of these 1.5 crore, there are only 14.6 lakh devices to accept debit
[Guest]: or credit cards. And some of these devices are actually such that in one shop, there
[Guest]: are two or three devices. So you can say less than 10%, well below 10% shops have the facility
[Guest]: to accept card based payment. This was the reality on November 8th. So of course, these
[Guest]: things should change and will change over a period of time. But what this means is there
[Guest]: is a certain disruption that sets in when the decision is taken in such a sudden way.
[Guest]: So what you're seeing is that yes, some people have in terms of the number of transactions
[Guest]: moved to the cashless instruments and using it. But even there, the values of transaction
[Guest]: are actually not increasing. They're actually dropping on average, because they're trying
[Guest]: to adapt and figure out whether to spend how much to spend and all of that. We have to
[Guest]: figure that out what is happening there. But this is a massive monetary shock. Now let
[Guest]: me just come to contextualize the monetary shock a little bit. When the decision was
[Guest]: taken, there were about 18 lakh crore rupees of currency in circulation, out of which 15.4
[Guest]: lakh crore rupees were in 500,000 rupee notes, which was disrupted. There are about 10.5
[Guest]: lakh crore rupees in demand deposits in banks, and more than 96 lakh crore rupees in time
[Guest]: deposit in banks. Okay, so this is a part of that overall money supply that is available
[Guest]: to you and me for transacting and for storing the value. Now, out of this currency in circulation,
[Guest]: 86% was destroyed, not the 86% of total money supply. But for people who are only using
[Guest]: cash for them 100% of their I mean, most almost 100% of the practical medium exchange cash
[Guest]: was destroyed. So those are where the impacts are likely to be. So there's a lot likely
[Guest]: to be a lot of impact on the informal sector. So if the Federation of Small and Medium Enterprises
[Guest]: has said that 80% of their members have been severely affected by this decision, we'll
[Guest]: know the impact when better measurements are done, surveys are done. So and in a formal
[Guest]: economy where the GDP measurement will show a certain impact, we'll know in a few quarters
[Guest]: what is the impact, because the recent estimate that was put out by CSO does not take into
[Guest]: account the data and all the numbers onwards. But we will know and the estimates about what
[Guest]: is that impact range from 0.5% to 3.5%. I've not done any forecasting, but it is likely
[Guest]: to be a significant impact. And just remember that 1% of GDP is about 1.5 lakh crore rupees
[Guest]: of cost. And much more important to understand and this cost will incurred by people who
[Guest]: didn't do anything wrong, you know, so and so the nature of this cost is very different
[Guest]: from the nature of the benefit. So you can't say that one rupee of benefit in the form
[Guest]: of a loss inflicted on someone who is holding black money is the same as one rupee of wage
[Guest]: loss for a labourer who's not able to get work. So the nature of costs and dimensions
[Guest]: are very different. And you have to take that into account while you're comparing by costs
[Guest]: and benefits. So even if suppose we figure out that 2 lakh crore rupees of loss was inflicted
[Guest]: on people with black money, you better have much smaller cost to justify that. You cannot
[Guest]: say that as long as 1 lakh 99,999 crore rupee worth of costs have been incurred, it's okay,
[Guest]: because the benefits are out of the cost. No, that's not how it should work. Because
[Guest]: if you truly take the welfare implications into account, the welfare implication for
[Guest]: someone holding the black money, getting a 5% haircut is almost negligible, while a welfare
[Guest]: implication of a person not able to get wage for 10, 15, 20 days is much more significant.
[Guest]: So that you have to take into account that's good applied economics that in fact is a part
[Guest]: of policymaking when you do cost benefit analysis in many countries, you'd have to take equity
[Guest]: considerations into account. And once you take into account my hypothesis right now
[Guest]: is that costs are going to outweigh the benefits. I mean the humanitarian costs are massive
[Amit Varma]: and one reason for this is that despite the government's energetic PR on this matter,
[Amit Varma]: the fact is that a lot of people weren't equipped to even begin moving towards a cashless economy.
[Amit Varma]: The fact remains that around 600 million people or 60 crore people don't have bank accounts
[Amit Varma]: and 300 million people don't have any form of ID whatsoever. So this means all the people
[Amit Varma]: who store their life savings in cash, a significant number of them aren't even able to go to the
[Amit Varma]: bank to exchange it for new notes or to you know move seamlessly into what you call the
[Amit Varma]: digital economy. And what's your take on the sort of the impact on the informal sector
[Amit Varma]: and the impact on the poorest of the poor?
[Guest]: So data will come in right, over a period of time we'll learn more about what's the
[Guest]: impact on different sectors and different, I mean wage employment creation, the association
[Guest]: of manufacturers in India have put a, put very drastic numbers out of the job loss because
[Guest]: of this, revenue loss because of this, 30-40% job loss, 50% drop in revenues. They put out
[Guest]: a large survey just a few days ago about the impact on their members. These are the manufacturers,
[Guest]: this is the Make in India crowd. So you've got this, these bits and pieces of data that
[Guest]: are coming out. Some of them are pretty significant and we have to look further into what is going
[Guest]: on and some others we will know over a period of time. But even if you don't have this data,
[Guest]: you're sitting on 8th of November, you should be able to say with some level of confidence
[Guest]: with certain range, what is the likely impact on these? Because these are businesses which
[Guest]: have supply chains which are very cash intensive, you know. They may be a case to be made for
[Guest]: pushing, I mean slowly nudging them towards a less cash behaviour, you know. But to do
[Guest]: this in this manner is a little, you know, difficult to accept. So, and what is the environment
[Guest]: in which this is happening? If you look at the corporate data from 2016, about a third
[Guest]: of the firms in India which do regular reporting were in financial stress. What does that mean?
[Guest]: It means this precisely, that their operating profit was less than their interest obligation
[Guest]: in a given year, okay. So that means that they are not even able to earn enough to be
[Guest]: able to service their debt, which means they are very close to failure, right. So a third
[Guest]: of them were there before this event happened. Now suppose some of them fail because of this.
[Guest]: So those, that organisational capital that was created by some bunch of entrepreneurs
[Guest]: and people working together over years and decades to create that will be lost forever.
[Guest]: That's a permanent loss for the economy, that's a productivity loss. People who are working
[Guest]: there, for them it's a job loss and given the fact that generally their economic condition
[Guest]: is not good. You look at the investment data, the gross fixed capital formation, data on
[Guest]: new investment announcements, data on fixed assets of firms, all across there has been
[Guest]: a drop in the last, before demonetisation also, there was a significant drop. For example,
[Guest]: GFCF is this year expected to, even the CSOs own projections drop, which is a very rare
[Guest]: thing because GFCF is a measure of investment in the economy and in a developing country
[Guest]: it usually just grows. But if you look at the last decade, in most years it has grown
[Guest]: by double digit numbers. This year it's going to shrink. So that's the context in which
[Guest]: this is happening. So if it was a very good situation and we were in a real boom situation,
[Guest]: then the impact would have been a little less because many, less firms would have been on
[Guest]: the border of failure, between failure and survival. And now it's, there's so many firms
[Guest]: on that border that's more likely to be pushed down to failure. And that's a discontinuity.
[Guest]: That's not just, you know, a step down. That's a throw into the abyss. You fall into the
[Guest]: abyss.
[Guest]: It's like a quantum leap backwards.
[Guest]: Yes. So those firms, when they fail, I mean, it's not a reduction in profit. It's a destruction
[Guest]: of organisational capital. It's a reduction of certain jobs, certain productivity in the
[Guest]: economy, which is lost forever. And it will take years to recreate it because you, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, how difficult it is to create a firm and make it survive, create some jobs.
[Guest]: And this was a particularly bad time because firms are already hurting.
[Amit Varma]: One interesting statistic I saw, which illustrates how different strata of society have been
[Amit Varma]: affected by demonetisation is automobile sales, which have dipped sharply, most of all in
[Amit Varma]: the two-wheeler and three-wheeler segments. But SUVs haven't really seen a dip, which
[Amit Varma]: indicates that those who are relatively well-heeled and traditionally the holders of black money
[Amit Varma]: have done their jogar. They've laundered whatever they had to launder. And it's really just
[Amit Varma]: the poor who are suffering.
[Amit Varma]: All of the economic disruption that is happening now, these firms going through welfare shocks
[Amit Varma]: and shutting down, all the people losing their jobs and migrant labour shifting back and
[Amit Varma]: asking for enrega. How does it play out in the long run? Is it like a sort of a temporary
[Amit Varma]: disruption and all the migrant labour will be back in the cities next quarter? Or is
[Amit Varma]: it something that has rippled effects that go much beyond this and keep hurting the economy
[Amit Varma]: over a period of time?
[Guest]: So let's set aside economic theory and just talk in terms of what we observe in the world,
[Guest]: right? So yes, I'm expecting that by end of March, cash shortage will be mostly eased,
[Guest]: right? ETMs will have cash, branches will not decline your money beyond 24,000 and all
[Guest]: of that. So let's assume that is going to happen and things likely to happen. So at
[Guest]: that point, some people are saying the disruption is, the shock is going to end. Yes, the shock
[Guest]: in terms of the monetary shock will end that day. But there are knock-on effects. How does
[Guest]: the world work, right? Like why do companies produce, why do factories produce? Because
[Guest]: you and I can go and buy. Why are we, you and I able to buy? Because we're earning from
[Guest]: somewhere, right? Why are we being paid? Because there is some demand for our labour, you know,
[Guest]: in those companies that we work or wherever we work and on and on it goes, right? When
[Guest]: you disrupt this, like, for example, you talked about auto sales, there's been a huge shock
[Guest]: on two and three wheeler sale, right? Which will show up in the production numbers. Later
[Guest]: the production should be realigned to produce fewer two and three wheelers. You're not going
[Guest]: to just produce to stock, right? That's extremely inefficient. So that has an impact on the
[Guest]: employment in these sectors and their ancillary industries, right? So those people will earn
[Guest]: a little less. If they earn a little less, they will be spending a little less. And that
[Guest]: will have a knock-on effect on the demand and in various sectors in the economy. That's
[Guest]: one pathway. Second is that banks whose NPAs are at 9.1% of their total advances are going
[Guest]: to probably, I mean, they have to see how it goes. It's probably going to be in a much
[Guest]: worse shape. First of all, the immediate impact because it's two, three months, they're not
[Guest]: doing anything other than this dispensing of cash. So they haven't had the time to really
[Guest]: figure out collection and all of that. But some of the firms that were basically indebted
[Guest]: by the banks will go into stress because of this event. And there will be more bad debt
[Guest]: created because of that. Some more NPAs might be created and some companies which were about
[Guest]: to come back into a situation where they can repay the bank loan would now probably again
[Guest]: go back. So if the banking sector gets into another crisis, a bigger crisis, it's already
[Guest]: in a crisis and it gets worse, then the credit supply can get choked, right? We are at a
[Guest]: credit growth, which is lowest in about two decades, right? It's like six, it's hovering
[Guest]: on six, 7%. And I mean, if you account for inflation, it's almost flat, which is very,
[Guest]: very rare. We have seen two digit credit growth for the most part. So in the last few decades.
[Guest]: So the question is that these are different paths which are going to play out. I'm not
[Guest]: going to give a specific prediction about how it's going to play out, but I'm just describing
[Guest]: to you generically how we observe the world and how this, how the general equilibrium
[Guest]: response happens, right? These different demand shocks will play out into production, production
[Guest]: will again affect demand and there's a knock on effect. The banking sector crisis, if it
[Guest]: becomes further worse, is going to then play out into the ability of firms to borrow and
[Guest]: then borrow to invest or borrow even to just keep, survive. So these all impacts will play
[Guest]: out and then that will determine how long the crisis lasts. So it's not going to end
[Guest]: in March, 2017. It will last longer. How much longer? We don't know. I mean, I'm assuming
[Guest]: about a year more of difficulties of this type will be there. And then depending on
[Guest]: how the government responds and what reforms are done and how people's own ingenuity rises
[Guest]: to respond to these challenges, we will see how long it lasts.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to end with a slightly deeper and more fundamental question. One way the government
[Amit Varma]: spins a demonetization is saying that, yes, it's disrupting the informal sector, the cash
[Amit Varma]: sector in a really big way, but that's a good thing because we need to get rid of the informal
[Amit Varma]: sector and, you know, have just a formal economy where everyone's paying their taxes and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth. And the way I've always looked at it is that the existence of an informal
[Amit Varma]: sector is not a reflection of the moral failing of the people, but of an institutional failure
[Amit Varma]: on the part of the state. Is that something you'd agree with? And I mean, how would one
[Amit Varma]: unpack this? Why is an informal sector necessarily a bad thing? Why does it exist in the first
[Guest]: place?
[Guest]: So let me take it point by point. First, let's take an example of a brick manufacturing setup
[Guest]: in, say, my village. Okay. It's set up by some person who has never even told the state
[Guest]: that he or she exists or his or her enterprise exists. Never told anybody. There's no registered
[Guest]: company, never paid tax. Say, employs 20 people directly and indirectly. Produces some brick
[Guest]: useful for society. I mean, the very fact that they exist means that they're providing
[Guest]: a value to society. Because people are buying bricks, bricks are useful. People build houses,
[Guest]: etc, etc. So what is wrong with this person? The most important wrong that this person
[Guest]: is doing is the fact that he or she is not paying taxes, right? That's the main thing.
[Guest]: Other than, yes, he's not registered a company and all of that, employing people without
[Guest]: reporting to the labor department, all of that is there, but the main thing. So what
[Guest]: is the outcome we want from this? I mean, what is socially optimal? Socially optimal
[Guest]: is this person starts paying taxes, you know, maybe pay some back penalty for the taxes
[Guest]: he or she has avoided for a few years and start paying taxes and then comes into the
[Guest]: formal sector and starts, you know, being a part of this formal economy, official economy.
[Guest]: That will be good because I'm assuming the taxes are fair and all of that. Let's abstract
[Guest]: that away, that there will be concerns about taxation and all of that. So that's one. But
[Guest]: if this, you do demonetization and this business is highly cash intensive and it dies, then
[Guest]: the society is not really better off because those 20 jobs are gone. This organizational
[Guest]: capital, of course, informal is gone forever. So how is this more optimal than having a,
[Guest]: I mean, this semi-legal enterprise producing? It's a legal activity. I mean, making bricks
[Guest]: is not illegal. He's doing it in a illegal way. So that, that, that is, I mean, I'm not
[Guest]: approving of that. So that's one way of looking at it. Just take an example of such enterprises
[Guest]: and see what would be better for society. That you go after these guys, cash them and
[Guest]: make them pay taxes and then continue, let them continue with their businesses, right?
[Guest]: Or you just take the risk of destroying some of them because of demonetization. That's
[Guest]: one. Second is that you have to think about why people do informalization. Like let's
[Guest]: talk about, say, labor force, right? A lot of informalization have been induced by our
[Guest]: own labor laws. I mean, this is, it's a cliche to say it. Everybody knows the issues there.
[Guest]: Why more than 90% are employed informally into the economy because to employ someone
[Guest]: formally comes with such huge obligations that it is better for you to temp and construct.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially compliance is either impossible or the cost of compliance is too high.
[Guest]: For competitiveness purposes. So if you're in the same sector, there are some people
[Guest]: who are doing a lot of contracting and temping and some people who are mostly taking on roles,
[Guest]: formalizing labor, then the latter are going to be in a disadvantage because the former
[Guest]: don't have to incur those compliance costs and are not bound by the restrictions on hiring
[Guest]: and firing and all those kinds of issues. So there are those reasons also, which the
[Guest]: state very much has its control, you know, like state, in a broad sense, central government
[Guest]: as well as state government, they have certain powers which they can use to ease those burdens
[Guest]: which will then encourage formalization. There will still be people who will always want
[Guest]: to stay under the radar. For them, enforcement is a strategy. You go after them, you catch
[Guest]: them and you bring them to the law, right? Like, okay, you've been avoiding taxes for
[Guest]: 10 years, you pay taxes, your penalties, all of that. So that's the way to go. But to use
[Guest]: this kind of a blend instrument, and some people have said this is an experiment, you
[Guest]: know, it's an experiment for society. But there are experiments that are worth running
[Guest]: and experiments that are maybe not so good running. Like some writers said that there's
[Guest]: an invisible hiding hand, you know, the benevolent hiding hand. But that's Hirschman's characterization.
[Guest]: He took 11 cases and wrote that there's a benevolent hiding hand. It's a very interesting
[Guest]: concept. It says this, that when the policymaker is making, announcing a new project, you usually
[Guest]: underestimate the risk of risk in the project, the obstacles you're going to face. And that's
[Guest]: good because later human ingenuity ensures that the benefits outweigh the cost. That
[Guest]: is hypothesis based on 11 cases. But in 2015, there was a paper that Cass and his co-author
[Guest]: did who looked at more than 300 cases put together. And they found that in about 80%
[Guest]: cases, it's a malevolent hiding hand, not the benevolent. In about 80% cases, what you
[Guest]: see is that the costs are higher than what you had initially imagined and benefits are
[Guest]: lower. Because it's the opposite that happens. It's not that human ingenuity works to increase
[Guest]: the benefits and reduce the cost for society. In fact, the opposite happens because many
[Guest]: people are able to take advantage and all of that. So the pathways are not very clear,
[Guest]: but there are empirically compared to the initial expected benefits and expected costs,
[Guest]: the final costs are higher and benefits are smaller than about 80% of these 300 odd cases.
[Guest]: So empirically, Hirschman's benevolent hiding hand is more of an exception. Out of five,
[Guest]: one case you will find where the benevolent hiding hand is working, and the experiment
[Guest]: is going to succeed and make the society better. Even if you don't know the outcome in the
[Guest]: beginning, right, you underestimated the costs and overestimated the benefit at the beginning.
[Guest]: But when it actually plays out, you may realise that you know, you actually overestimated
[Guest]: the benefits and underestimated the costs. So we have to look at it that way. And this
[Guest]: particular experiment I suspect is going to be more of a malevolent hiding hand. I have
[Guest]: some, it's my hypothesis, malevolent hiding hand, because the way it's playing out, everybody
[Guest]: is guilty unless proven innocent. Everybody is a little suspicious. So people are going
[Guest]: to respond to basically not look at what is the larger problem that is being solved, how
[Guest]: we can contribute to it. They're going to just save themselves or take the opportunity
[Guest]: to do whatever they can for themselves about it. So although lately, we have been hearing
[Guest]: the narrative that you're all in it together, we are all fighting this together. For about
[Guest]: a month, month and a half, it was like a lot of uncertainty. There was a state and people
[Guest]: on the other side, and everybody who was depositing or exchanging was suspect and now taxman could
[Guest]: come after you and all of that. So we should not be very confident that this is going to
[Guest]: necessarily become a benevolent hiding hand and we are going to have a successful experiment.
[Guest]: And if the planning was wrong, people's ingenuity will bring it up and make it a good decision
[Guest]: because the nature of the decision does not lend itself to those kinds of responses from
[Amit Varma]: the society, in my view.
[Amit Varma]: So, Yash, thanks a lot for talking to us about the malevolent unseen effects of demonetization.
[Guest]: It was a pleasure having you on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. Thank you. It was fun talking to you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: The day demonetization was announced, I wrote to my editor at the Times of India, for whom
[Amit Varma]: I write occasional guest columns, that this was a defining political event of the decade.
[Amit Varma]: I think I might have understated it. Since this podcast was recorded, the IMF has released
[Amit Varma]: their estimate of GDP growth for the years to come. According to their forecast, our
[Amit Varma]: growth forecast has dropped by a full percentage point to 6.6 for this year. This is not a
[Amit Varma]: mere statistic. As my friend Nitin Pai of the Takshashila Institution has pointed out, a 1% increase
[Amit Varma]: in GDP means that around 2 million people come out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: Demonetization, therefore, is a humanitarian disaster with real human costs, and most of
[Amit Varma]: its unseen effects will remain unseen as private tragedy, barely reflected in public data.
[Amit Varma]: As it happens, both Soyash and I have written extensively on this subject, and you can read
[Amit Varma]: our pieces on this episode's page on sceneunseen.in. On that note, I bid you goodbye until next
[Amit Varma]: week when Devangshu Dutta will join me to discuss GST, the Goods and Services Tax.
[Unknown]: Take care.